Update observability doc structure and content (#35816)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/metrics.md

(collect-metrics)=
# Collecting metrics

> Metrics (both system and application metrics) are useful for monitoring and troubleshooting Ray applications and system. For example, you may want to access a node's metrics if it dies unexpectedly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics are useful for monitoring and troubleshooting the system and applications. For example, you may want to access a node's metrics if it dies unexpectedly.
```

> Similar to Kubenetes, Ray records and emits time-series metrics in [Prometheus format](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/). Ray does not provide a native storage solution for metrics. Users need to manage the lifecycle of the metrics by themselves. This page provides instructions on how to collect metrics from Ray clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to Kubernetes, Ray records and emits time-series metrics using the [Prometheus format](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/). Ray does not provide a native storage solution for metrics. Users need to manage the lifecycle of the metrics by themselves. This page provides instructions on how to collect metrics from Ray Clusters.
```

## System and applcication metrics

> **System metrics**: Ray exports a number of system metrics. View {ref}`system metrics <system-metrics>` for more details of the emitted metrics .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**System metrics**: Ray exports a number of system metrics. View {ref}`system metrics <system-metrics>` for more details about the emitted metrics.
```

> **Application metrics**: Application-specific metrics are useful to monitor your application states. View {ref}`adding application metrics <application-level-metrics>` for how to record your metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Application metrics**: Application-specific metrics are useful for monitoring your application states. View {ref}`adding application metrics <application-level-metrics>` for how to record metrics.
```

(prometheus-setup)=
## Setting up your Prometheus server

> Ray doesn't start Prometheus servers for users. Users need to decide where to host it and configure it so that it can scrape the metrics from clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray doesn't start Prometheus servers for users. Users need to decide where to host and configure it to scrape the metrics from the clusters.
```

```{admonition} Tip
:class: tip
The instructions below describe how to set up Prometheus on your local machine. View [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/) for the best strategy to set up your Prometheus Server (e.g., whether to use a multi-tenant Prometheus instance).
```

> First, [download Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/download/). Make sure to download the correct binary for your operating system. (Ex: darwin for mac osx)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, [download Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/download/). Make sure to download the correct binary for your operating system. (For example, Darwin for macOS X.)
```

> Then, unzip the archive into a local directory using the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, unzip the archive into a local directory using the following command:
```

```bash
tar xvfz prometheus-*.tar.gz
cd prometheus-*
```

> Ray exports metrics only when ``ray[default]`` is installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray exports metrics only when you install ``ray[default]``.
```

Author: @rkooo567 Do you know what component is needed for exporting metrics? Dashboard component? Asking this because if it is the case, other commands that install dashboard should work too.

Author: How about ray[air] or other installation commands that include dashboard?

Author: Users may use ray air or only one of the libraries. What people need to know is what we they need to do to make sure metrics can be exported. Only listing ray[default] is not enough.

```
Ray exports metrics when you use `ray[default]`, `ray[air]`, or {ref}`other installation commands <installation>`that install the Dashboard component.
```
I want something like this but I'm not sure if it's accurate or not.

```bash
pip install "ray[default]"
```

> Ray provides a prometheus config that works out of the box. After running ray, it can be found at `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/prometheus/prometheus.yml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray provides a Prometheus config that works out of the box. After running Ray, you can find the config at `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/prometheus/prometheus.yml`.
```

```yaml
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s

scrape_configs:

> # Scrape from each ray node as defined in the service_discovery.json provided by ray.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Scrape from each Ray node as defined in the service_discovery.json provided by Ray.
```

- job_name: 'ray'
  file_sd_configs:
  - files:
    - '/tmp/ray/prom_metrics_service_discovery.json'
```

> Next, let's start Prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, start Prometheus.
```

```shell
./prometheus --config.file=/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/prometheus/prometheus.yml
```
```{admonition} Note
:class: note

> If you are using mac, you may receive an error at this point about trying to launch an application where the developer has not been verified. See the "Troubelshooting" guide below to fix the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using macOS, you may receive an error at this point about trying to launch an application where the developer has not been verified. See the "Troubleshooting" guide below to fix the issue.
```

```

> Now, you can access Ray metrics from the default Prometheus url, `http://localhost:9090`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you can access Ray metrics from the default Prometheus URL, `http://localhost:9090`.
```

### Troubleshooting

> #### Getting Prometheus to use the Ray configurations when installed via Homebrew on macOS X

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Using Ray configurations in Prometheus with Homebrew on macOS X
```

> With Homebrew, Prometheus is installed as a service that is automatically launched for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Homebrew installs Prometheus as a service that is automatically launched for you.
```

> Therefore, to configure these services, you cannot simply pass in the config files as command line arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure these services, you cannot simply pass in the config files as command line arguments.
```

Instead, change the --config-file line in `/usr/local/etc/prometheus.args` to read `--config.file /tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/prometheus/prometheus.yml`.

You can then start or restart the services with `brew services start prometheus`.

> #### MacOS does not trust the developer to install Prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### macOS does not trust the developer to install Prometheus
```

You may have received an error that looks like this:

![trust error](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/Images/master/docs/troubleshooting/prometheus-trusted-developer.png)

> When downloading binaries from the internet, Mac requires that the binary be signed by a trusted developer ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When downloading binaries from the internet, macOS requires that the binary be signed by a trusted developer ID.
```

> Unfortunately, many developers today are not trusted by Mac and so this requirement must be overridden by the user manaully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many developers are not on macOS's trusted list. Users can manually override this requirement.
```

> See [these instructions](https://support.apple.com/guide/mac-help/open-a-mac-app-from-an-unidentified-developer-mh40616/mac) on how to override the restriction and install or run the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [these instructions](https://support.apple.com/guide/mac-help/open-a-mac-app-from-an-unidentified-developer-mh40616/mac) for how to override the restriction and install or run the application.
```

(scrape-metrics)=
## Scraping metrics
Ray runs a metrics agent per node to export system and application metrics. Each metrics agent collects metrics from the local

> node and exposes these in a Prometheus format. You can then scrape each endpoint to access the metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
node and exposes them in a Prometheus format. You can then scrape each endpoint to access the metrics.
```

To scrape the endpoints, we need to ensure service discovery, allowing Prometheus to find the metrics agents' endpoints on each node.

### Auto-discovering metrics endpoints

> You can allow Prometheus to dynamically find endpoints it should scrape by using Prometheus' [file based service discovery](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/file-sd/#installing-configuring-and-running-prometheus).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can allow Prometheus to dynamically find the endpoints to scrape by using Prometheus' [file based service discovery](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/file-sd/#installing-configuring-and-running-prometheus).
```

> This is the recommended way to export Prometheus metrics when using the Ray {ref}`cluster launcher <vm-cluster-quick-start>`, as node IP addresses can often change as the cluster scales up and down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use autodiscovery to export Prometheus metrics when using the Ray {ref}`cluster launcher <vm-cluster-quick-start>`, as node IP addresses can often change as the cluster scales up and down.
```

> Ray auto-generates a Prometheus [service discovery file](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/file-sd/#installing-configuring-and-running-prometheus) on the head node to facilitate metrics agents' service discovery. This allows you to scrape all metrics in the cluster without knowing their IPs. Let's walk through how to acheive this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray auto-generates a Prometheus [service discovery file](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/file-sd/#installing-configuring-and-running-prometheus) on the head node to facilitate metrics agents' service discovery. This function allows you to scrape all metrics in the cluster without knowing their IPs. Steps for achieving this setup are below.
```

> The service discovery file is generated on the {ref}`head node <cluster-head-node>`. On this node, look for ``/tmp/ray/prom_metrics_service_discovery.json`` (or the eqiuvalent file if using a custom Ray ``temp_dir``). Ray will periodically update this file with the addresses of all metrics agents in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The service discovery file is generated on the {ref}`head node <cluster-head-node>`. On this node, look for ``/tmp/ray/prom_metrics_service_discovery.json`` (or the eqiuvalent file if using a custom Ray ``temp_dir``). Ray periodically updates this file with the addresses of all metrics agents in the cluster.
```

> Ray automatically produces a Prometheus config which scrapes the file for service discovery found at `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/prometheus/prometheus.yml`. You can choose to use this config or modify your own to enable this behavior. The details of the config can be seen below and full documentation can be found [here](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray automatically produces a Prometheus config, which scrapes the file for service discovery found at `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/prometheus/prometheus.yml`. You can choose to use this config or modify your own config to enable this behavior. See the details of the config below. Find full documentation [here](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/).
```

> With this config, Prometheus will automatically update the addresses that it scrapes based on the contents of Ray's service discovery file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this config, Prometheus automatically updates the addresses that it scrapes based on the contents of Ray's service discovery file.
```

```yaml
# Prometheus config file

# my global config
global:
  scrape_interval:     2s
  evaluation_interval: 2s

# Scrape from Ray.
scrape_configs:
- job_name: 'ray'
  file_sd_configs:
  - files:
    - '/tmp/ray/prom_metrics_service_discovery.json'
```

### Manually discovering metrics endpoints

> If you already know the IP addresses of all nodes in your Ray Cluster, you can configure Prometheus to read metrics from a static list of endpoints. To

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already know the IP addresses of the nodes in your Ray Cluster, you can configure Prometheus to read metrics from a static list of endpoints. To
```

> do this, first set a fixed port that Ray should use to export metrics.  If using the cluster VM launcher, pass ``--metrics-export-port=<port>`` to ``ray start``.  If using KubeRay, you can specify ``rayStartParams.metrics-export-port`` in the RayCluster configuration file. The port must be specified on all nodes in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set a fixed port that Ray should use to export metrics.  If using the cluster VM launcher, pass ``--metrics-export-port=<port>`` to ``ray start``.  If using KubeRay, you can specify ``rayStartParams.metrics-export-port`` in the RayCluster configuration file. The port must be specified on all nodes in the cluster.
```

> If you do not know the IP addresses of the nodes in your Ray cluster, you can also programmatically discover the endpoints by reading the Ray Cluster information. Here, we will use a Python script and the ``ray.nodes()`` API to find the metrics agents' URLs, by combining the ``NodeManagerAddress`` with the ``MetricsExportPort``. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not know the IP addresses of the nodes in your Ray Cluster, you can also programmatically discover the endpoints by reading the Ray Cluster information. The following example uses a Python script and the ``ray.nodes()`` API to find the metrics agents' URLs, by combining the ``NodeManagerAddress`` with the ``MetricsExportPort``. 
```

Reviewer: Should we link to the API?

Author: Yes.

```python
# On a cluster node:
import ray
ray.init()
from pprint import pprint
pprint(ray.nodes())

"""

> The <NodeManagerAddress>:<MetricsExportPort> from each of these entries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pass the <NodeManagerAddress>:<MetricsExportPort> from each of these entries
```

> should be passed to Prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to Prometheus.
```

  'NodeManagerAddress': '192.168.1.82',
  'NodeManagerHostname': 'host2.attlocal.net',
  'NodeManagerPort': 61760,
  'ObjectManagerPort': 61454,
  'ObjectStoreSocketName': '/tmp/ray/session_2020-08-04_18-18-16_481195_34255/sockets/plasma_store',
  'RayletSocketName': '/tmp/ray/session_2020-08-04_18-18-16_481195_34255/sockets/raylet',
  'Resources': {'CPU': 1.0,
                'memory': 123.0,
                'node:192.168.1.82': 1.0,
                'object_store_memory': 2.0},
  'alive': True},
{'Alive': True,
  'MetricsExportPort': 8080,
  'NodeID': 'ce6f30a7e2ef58c8a6893b3df171bcd464b33c77',
  'NodeManagerAddress': '192.168.1.82',
  'NodeManagerHostname': 'host1.attlocal.net',
  'NodeManagerPort': 62052,
  'ObjectManagerPort': 61468,
  'ObjectStoreSocketName': '/tmp/ray/session_2020-08-04_18-18-16_481195_34255/sockets/plasma_store.1',
  'RayletSocketName': '/tmp/ray/session_2020-08-04_18-18-16_481195_34255/sockets/raylet.1',
  'Resources': {'CPU': 1.0,
                'memory': 134.0,
                'node:192.168.1.82': 1.0,
                'object_store_memory': 2.0},
  'alive': True}]
"""
```

## Processing and exporting metrics

> If you need to process and export metrics into other storage/management systems, there are a number of open source metric processing tools available such as [Vector][Vector].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to process and export metrics into other storage or management systems, you can consider a number of open source metric processing tools available, such as [Vector][Vector].
```

(collect-metrics)=

> # Collecting metrics

Reviewer 2: do we have a link to this page from the observabiltiy tab?

Author: <img width="818" alt="Screenshot 2023-06-01 at 9 44 23 PM" src="https://github.com/ray-project/ray/assets/9677264/eab51a3a-3c09-416f-a571-00eeaf6ce265">
There are several cross-links, like this one ^
